Skiing Fall
Washington, Liberty Ridge
Author: Mr. Rainier National Park. Climb Year: 2020. Publication Year: 2021. 

In the afternoon of June 26, Matthew Bunker (28) was descending on skis when he fell on steep terrain around 10,400 feet, just below Thumb Rock, the high camp for the Liberty Ridge route. His partner reported Bunker missing at about 3 p.m. Climbing rangers conducted several aerial searches, but severe winds and clouds hampered search efforts until June 29, when a ranger spotted Bunker’s body in a crevasse. Park officials said they were unable to recover the body because of continuous rockfall and icefall hazards. (Source: Mt. Rainier National Park.)
ANALYSIS
It’s unknown what caused the skier to fall. Depending on the snow surface, it would have been difficult to impossible for a skier to arrest a slide on this terrain. (Source: The Editors.)
#!#!
Deadly Rockfall At Thumb Rock
Washington, Mt. Rainier, Liberty Ridge
Author: Mt. Rainier National Park Incident Report. Climb Year: 2019. Publication Year: 2020. 

At about 8:30 p.m. on May 29, a climber called 911 to report a large rockfall around 10,800 feet at Thumb Rock, high camp for the Liberty Ridge route. The climber relayed to dispatchers that Arleigh William “Bill” Dean (46) had been killed and two other climbers were seriously injured by the rockfall. Weather and the late hour kept rescuers from conducting a rescue until the next day.
The injured and deceased were members of three separate teams attempting Liberty Ridge. The first team arrived at Thumb Rock around noon. Dean’s team followed at about 2 p.m. The last group showed up at 3 p.m. They spaced their three tents three to four feet vertically from each other on a slope, with Dean’s tent in the middle. The afternoon was hot, with slushy snow, sliding snow, and multiple rockfall incidents. All six climbers were inside their tents when the rockfall occurred just before sunset.
A climber in the lowest tent said he was listening to music but had left one earbud out to listen for rockfall. He’d even joked about wearing a helmet to bed. As the sun waned, he heard yelling and felt rocks graze his back and neck. Dean’s tent was pushed partially on top of the lowest tent. The uninjured climbers exited their tents and began to treat those who were hurt. One climber called 911, and another hit the SOS button on his Garmin device. After learning rescuers would not be coming that night, they wrapped the injured climbers to keep them warm and stayed awake to watch for more rockfall.
The next morning, low clouds complicated the rescue operation. A helicopter airlifted the first injured climber around 12:30 p.m., transporting him to Harborview Medical Center in Seattle. The next climber was lifted from the scene about 2:10 p.m. Just before 3 p.m., Dean’s body was flown off the mountain. The uninjured climbers began descending from Thumb Rock around 11:15 a.m. and were evacuated from the Carbon Glacier at about 4:30 that afternoon. (Source: Mt. Rainier National Park incident report.)
ANALYSIS
This route is known to be committing, with rockfall and falling ice quite common. (See “Danger ones: Mt. Rainier” in ANAC 2014.) In May 2014, six climbers were swept to their deaths from the ridge while sleeping, presumably by rockfall or a snow slide. Although it’s difficult to protect against rockfall at Thumb Rock, it’s sometimes possible to build or enhance protective walls around tents. Weather also played a role in this accident. The climbers reported slushy conditions and rockfall, and the snow hadn’t frozen the night before. The park service recommends against attempting Liberty Ridge if the freezing level on Mt. Rainier is above 14,000 feet. Very strong climbers with good climbing conditions may consider camping at Curtis Ridge and then approaching and climbing Liberty Ridge in a single day (normally two days for most climbers), thus minimizing the exposure to falling rock and ice. (Source: The Editors.)
#!#!
Stranded – Weather, Exhaustion
Washington, Mt. Rainier, Liberty Ridge
Author: Mt. Rainier National Park and News Reports. Climb Year: 2019. Publication Year: 2020. 

On May 31, a team of four climbers set out from White River Campground to climb Liberty Ridge. Three days later, Yevgeniy Krasnitskiy (39), Ruslan Khasbulatov (33), Vasily Aushev (35), and Constantine Toporov (37 ) called 911 to report they were stranded at 13,500 feet, still about 600 feet below Liberty Cap, due to high wind and one of the men suffering from altitude sickness and exhaustion. Rangers attempted to reach the men with a park helicopter three times on June 3 and 4. A Chinook helicopter from Joint Base Lewis-McChord near Tacoma also responded, but clouds and wind up to 50 mph stopped all the rescue attempts.
The wind had destroyed the climbers’ tent, and they had lost a pack with gear and food. Rescuers attempted to drop supplies, but the men were unable to reach them. By June 5, the weather had worsened on the upper mountain, preventing aerial operations. However, the four men were able to climb about half a mile from their previous location, reaching a point near Liberty Cap that was much less affected by the wind. In a brief window of good weather on the morning of June 6, the park helicopter landed near the stranded climbers and flew them out in two groups. The men were treated briefly at a hospital for exposure and frostbite. (Sources: Mt. Rainier National Park and news reports.)
ANALYSIS
Conditions on big mountains change rapidly, and climbers should carry enough clothing, equipment, food, and fuel for unexpected delays. These climbers had heard about a rockfall fatality on Liberty Ridge two days before they started (see report above), so they chose not to camp at the usual Thumb Rock site and instead pushed higher. That last-minute decision contributed to their fatigue and positioned them in a very exposed spot when bad weather moved in. Nonetheless, their ability to reach Liberty Cap on their own greatly facilitated their rescue. (Sources: News reports and the Editors.)
#!#!
Stranded – Exposure, Weather
Washington, Mt. Rainier
Author: Mt. Rainier National Park. Climb Year: 2015. Publication Year: 2016. 

On June 11, Kyle Bufis, 25, and his partners, Derek Gavelis and Mathew Wiech, topped out on the challenging Liberty Ridge route on the north flank of the mountain. After reaching Liberty Cap, the trio got caught in high winds and whiteout conditions. They decided to hunker down in a crevasse near Liberty Saddle, the broad col at over 14,000 feet between Liberty Cap and Rainier’s main summit, and wait out the storm. They soon realized they’d left their stove behind while resting earlier. Bufis offered to retrieve it and left the crevasse. He never returned. The other two climbers sent a text message asking for help, and on June 12, unable to find their partner, they downclimbed in high winds to Camp Schurman and met rangers there. Bufis’ body was located the following day, “several hundred meters” from where he was last seen. (Sources: Mt. Rainier National Park and news reports.)
ANALYSIS 
Although it was admirable to volunteer to retrieve the stove, Bufis and the team would have been better off remaining in the relative shelter of the crevasse until conditions and visibility improved. The exact circumstances of his fate are unknown, but it’s likely Bufis simply got lost in the whiteout, in an area of the mountain with few landmarks, and succumbed to exposure. (Source: The Editors.) 
#!#!
Fall on Ice – Possible Avalanche
Washington, Mt. Rainier, Liberty Ridge
Climb Year: 2014. Publication Year: 2015. 

On Monday, May 26, an Alpine Ascents International guided party started an ascent of Mt. Rainier via Liberty Ridge. Led by guides Matt Hegeman and Eitan Green, John Mullaly (Seattle), Uday Marty (Singapore), Mark Mahaney (St. Paul), and Erik Kolb (New York) rounded out the team. They planned to bivouac on May 26 at Curtis Ridge and on May 27 at Thumb Rock on Liberty Ridge. They hoped to climb over the summit on May 28 and descend to Camp Schurman.
The AAI team was spotted as they ascended the route on Wednesday, May 28, by an independent party behind them. That evening, at 6:20 p.m., Hegeman called the company’s office to report they were going to camp and that the weather was deteriorating. Additionally, two texts, a SPOT tracking device message, and a picture of the Wednesday night camp were sent to friends of the climbers that night. As confirmed by one of the group’s SPOT beacons, they were camping at approximately 12,800 feet, near the top of the Black Pyramid, a large rocky feature that is bypassed by climbing a snow and ice slope on the left. Hegeman reported that all was well with the group and they hoped to summit the next day. These were the last messages received from the team.
At approximately 6:30 p.m. on May 30, Enumclaw police dispatch received a call from Alpine Ascents International reporting an overdue team on Liberty Ridge. At Camp Schurman, ranger Stefan Lofgren located and interviewed the pair of climbers who had just completed the Liberty Ridge and had seen the AAI party two days earlier. They told Lofgren that the larger team left Thumb Rock at about 8 a.m. on May 28, and that they had heard a belay signal yelled from above that afternoon. Around 4 p.m. bad weather moved in, and several inches of snow fell over the following hours. As they climbed the route the next day, the pair discovered a smashed ice axe near the base of the Black Pyramid, as well as a second ice axe planted in the snow and a black plastic bag higher up. They saw tracks but could not determine their age or origin.
An NPS-led search was launched early on May 31, with a climbing ranger team ascending the route and a helicopter team doing aerial reconnaissance. Aerial searchers located a broad debris field of climbing and camping gear (estimated at 0.5 mile by 0.25 miles in area) near the base of Willis Wall, 3,000 feet below the last known location of the climbers. No sign of survivors was observed, either by the ground team that climbed the Liberty Ridge or by aerial searchers. During a second helicopter flight in early afternoon, searchers equipped with avalanche beacons reported multiple beacon signals from the debris field. Again, however, no sign of survivors was observed, and ongoing icefall and rockfall in the area presented an immediate threat to the hovering helicopter or potential ground searchers.
Given the evidence, the NPS concluded that the party had been swept off the mountain, sometime while they were still at their high camp during the night of May 28 or the morning of May 29. Because of the significant risk to recovery teams, the decision was made on the afternoon of May 31 not to attempt immediate recovery of the victims. (Source: NPS Case Incident Record.)
ANALYSIS
Liberty Ridge is prone to the standard objective hazards of any big mountain climb, including glacier travel, altitude, weather, rock/ice fall, and avalanches. It remains unclear exactly what caused this accident, but it’s likely that an avalanche, icefall, or a collapsing ice ledge swept the climbers off the ridge and down to the Carbon Glacier below the Willis Wall. By all accounts, Matt Hegeman and Eitan Green were climbing guides of the highest caliber. This tragic event reminds us that regardless of how competent trip leaders, partners, or clients may be, the risks inherent in climbing mountains will always be present. (Source: The Editors.)
#!#!
Danger Zones: Mt. Rainier
Where & Why Accidents Happen
Author: Michiko Arai. Climb Year: 2013. Publication Year: 2014. 


The majestic, 14,410-foot volcano of Mt. Rainier, just 55 miles from Seattle, is one of the most popular mountaineering destinations in North America. Lined by massive glaciers on all sides, the mountain is attempted by about 10,000 people a year. It’s also the site of numerous accidents and close calls. More than 95 mountaineers have died on Rainier’s slopes, including the tragic loss of six climbers in late May 2014 after an avalanche high on Liberty Ridge.
This article aims to prevent future tragedies by analyzing the accident history of popular routes. We reviewed more than 110 reports from Mt. Rainier in Accidents in North American Mountaineering over the past 20 years. In addition, we examined the causes of climbing fatalities from 1984 through 2013, as tracked by Mountrainierclimbing.us. The data reveal accident trends on specific routes, suggesting how climbers might best prepare to avoid future incidents.
Geologically, Mt. Rainier sits on the Ring of Fire around the Pacific Ocean basin. Geologists consider Mt. Rainier to be an active, potentially dangerous volcano. More immediately, heavy snowfall and highly active glaciers shape the challenging terrain of the mountain.
Although there are more than 40 routes and variations up Mt. Rainier, the vast majority of climbers follow two lines: 1) up the Muir Snowfield to Camp Muir, followed by a summit attempt via the Ingraham Glacier or Disappointment Cleaver, or 2) the Emmons/Winthrop Glaciers route above Camp Schurman. With one prominent exception—Liberty Ridge—most accidents occur along these routes. As former climbing ranger Mike Gauthier notes in Mt. Rainier: A Climbing Guide, climbers tend to underestimate the difficulty of moderate routes.
As on any climb, hazards on Rainier fall into two categories: objective and subjective. Subjective hazards include errors on the climber’s part, such as inadequate experience, lack of fitness, and poor technique. Objective hazards include rockfall, icefall, storms, and avalanches. Although climbers can minimize subjective hazards through training and practice, many accidents result from a combination of factors. For example, an unfit climber may not be able to make it up and down the mountain before a warm afternoon increases the risk of rockfall or icefall. Accidents often have multiple layers of causes: The failure to keep snow from balling up on crampons causes a slip, which ends in a crevasse fall, which leads to injury or hypothermia.
Although storms and poor visibility are not often the immediate cause of an injury or fatality on Rainier, climbers should be aware that unexpected bad weather may occur anywhere on the mountain. Clouds, fog, and snow frequently contribute to the gravity of accidents and delay search and rescue efforts. July and August often bring stable weather, and these months see the most summit success. However, rain can fall high on the mountain in summer, causing treacherous footing when the freezing level drops.
Falls on snow and ice cause the most accidents on Rainier, especially on the Emmons/Winthrop Glaciers, Liberty Ridge, Ingraham Glacier, Disappointment Cleaver, and Kautz Glacier routes, and on Muir Snowfield. Climbers can avoid falling by learning the proper techniques for roped glacier travel, self-arrest, and climbing in crampons, trying more modest glacial routes to gain experience, and choosing appropriate partners. (See “Know the Ropes” in this edition.) Crevasse falls are most common on the Ingraham Glacier, Emmons Glacier, and near Camp Muir. Glissading accidents occur most often on Emmons Glacier, near Camp Muir, on the Muir Snowfield, and on the Inter Glacier.
Over the past 20 years of Accidents, Liberty Ridge, Ingraham Glacier, Disappointment Cleaver, and the Kautz Glacier have shown the greatest risk of avalanche, rockfall, and icefall. Mountaineers should attempt to climb these routes on colder days to decrease the risk of falling rocks and ice. Moving quickly and efficiently decreases exposure and risk of getting stuck.
Finally, climbers can decrease the risk of altitude illnesses and hypothermia by training appropriately, starting the climb healthy and hydrated, and properly acclimatizing.
Muir Snowfield and Camp Muir
Though it is not as steep as the upper mountain, the Muir Snowfield is the scene of many accidents, often involving climbers, hikers, or skiers unprepared for the conditions they’ll encounter, including icy snow and whiteouts. It’s not uncommon for people to wander to one side of the normal route and get into trouble. Crevasse falls occur, especially to the side of the main route and near Camp Muir (10,080’). Despite the relatively low elevation in this area, altitude sickness, hypothermia, and frostbite affect a number of climbers. Bottom line: Even the seemingly casual approach to Camp Muir must be viewed as a true mountaineering challenge, requiring appropriate preparation and equipment, including the ability to navigate in very limited visibility.
Disappointment Cleaver / Ingraham Glacier Direct 
Two-thirds of aspiring Rainier climbers attempt the Disappointment Cleaver or neighboring Ingraham Glacier Direct route. Many accidents and illnesses occur here, including falls on snow or ice, crevasse falls, and avalanches. The deadliest accident in Rainier’s history occurred just below Disappointment Cleaver in 1981, when an avalanche, likely caused by serac fall, wiped out 11 climbers. Falling ice on the Ingraham Glacier has been the cause of several other incidents. On or below Disappointment Cleaver, rockfall has caused several accidents. There is also a disproportionately high incidence of altitude illnesses.


Emmons/Winthrop Glaciers 
This route, the second most popular on Rainier, is attempted only a quarter as often as Disappointment Cleaver. Yet it has seen about the same number of accidents and fatalities in the past 30 years. Although it is the least technical route up Rainier, the Emmons/Winthrop climbs 10,000 feet and is physically arduous. Climbers must arrive with adequate fitness and stay hydrated in order to avoid sickness and exhaustion. More than one-third of the falls reported on Rainier in the past two decades have occurred here, especially as tired climbers descend from the upper mountain. Since the route travels across glaciers with enormous crevasses, falling climbers frequently fall into slots. The Emmons/Winthrop has been relatively free of avalanche or falling ice, suggesting that if climbers can stay on their feet they will likely have a successful climb.
Liberty Ridge 
This remote and difficult route is statistically the most dangerous on Rainier. Falls on snow or ice and avalanches have caused the most accidents. In addition, many accidents reported near the summit (Liberty Cap) or on the Emmons Glacier are actually the result of Liberty Ridge climbers becoming exhausted, hypothermic, or stranded by severe weather. (Most climbers traverse over 14,112-foot Liberty Cap and descend the Emmons/Winthrop Glaciers route.) This route’s commitment level requires an excellent forecast and low avalanche hazard, the ability to climb moderately steep ice with heavy loads, having the right navigational tools and skills, and carrying the equipment and food/fuel reserves necessary to sit out a storm near the top.
Summit Area
Whichever route climbers attempt, the crater rim and the slopes below are statistically dangerous. Severe weather and poor visibility strand climbers, leading to hypothermia, frostbite, and other injuries. There have been several instances of mountaineers mistakenly believing they could find warm shelter in the steam vents near the crater. It’s crucial to carry adequate bivouac gear and food to the top—don’t be tempted to leave your survival gear at high camp. Unsurprisingly, altitude-related illness is fairly common near the summit. Falls also are not uncommon on the relatively low-angle ground around the crater rim. Exhaustion, severe weather, or lack of visibility each present sufficient reason to turn back before getting into trouble near the summit.
Kautz Glacier / Fuhrer Finger
The relatively isolated routes on the south side, above the Wilson and Nisqually glaciers, attract about 5 percent of Rainier climbers, looking for moderately difficult and less crowded alternatives to the most popular climbs. In addition to the usual hazards—falls, crevasses, avalanche—icefall and rockfall are notable in the accident record, particularly on the Kautz Glacier. A helmet is mandatory, even low on the route, and choosing a protected bivouac site mid-route is paramount.


There is no substitute for training and real-world practice before attempting big, glaciated mountains. Nonetheless, excellent information can be found in the books Climbing Mt. Rainier, by Fred Beckey and Alex Van Steen; Mount Rainier: A Climbing Guide, by Mike Gauthier; and The Challenge of Rainier, by Dee Molenaar. 
In addition, the National Park Service mountaineering webpage for Rainier (Nps.gov/mora/planyourvisit/climbing-2.htm) offers helpful trip-planning advice. Mountrainierclimbing.blogspot.com, a ranger-run website, is a great source of recent route information. 
#!#!
Fall on Ice, Climbing Alone and Unroped
New Hampshire, Crawford Notch, Frankenstein Cliffs
Climb Year: 2013. Publication Year: 2014. 

Mark, Pete, and I (Jesse Morenz) headed up to the Whites early Saturday morning, March 16, to train for our upcoming Liberty Ridge climb. We arrived at the Frankenstein parking lot at 12:30 p.m. and planned on getting in two climbs before our larger alpine climb the next day. We decided to climb the first two pitches of Standard and then finish with the Penguin. At the base of the route we encountered an older climber (mid-60s). He was by himself and seemed a bit off. Not thinking much of it, we headed up the first pitch of Standard. Pete led up to the cave on the right side and set up a belay, bringing Mark and I up. At the cave we arranged ourselves and then Mark headed up the second pitch. After Mark began, we heard a sound that is hard to describe, but all of us knew what it was: the sound of a falling climber. I looked down to see the older climber cartwheeling down the lower portion of the route, all the way to the railroad tracks below. At first I thought he had slipped at the base of the route and tumbled down. I quickly realized that he was moving too fast—he had fallen off the first pitch of Standard Center while soloing.
Other than curl into a fetal position, he did not move after impact; this was a very serious injury or a fatality. At the tracks, four or so climbers reached him nearly instantly. They dispatched two runners to call 911 and get the litter from the emergency cache at the parking area. As this was happening, I called down to see if they needed help. They told me that they would need us to help carry him out. Being mindful of our own safety, Mark carefully downclimbed back to the cave and all three of us rapped down, leaving the rope in place. 
The first climbers on the scene had bandaged the victim’s head wound and taken his pulse, led by an IMCS guide. He was not unconscious, but was barely speaking. He was complaining about his hip and saying he could not breathe. He was gurgling when he took a breath. One of the runners returned with the litter and the group lifted him onto it, securing him with climbing rope and webbing. Then the group lifted the litter and carried the victim out. Climbers, many still in full gear, took turns keeping his airway clear. He complained from time to time that he could not breathe, but as time passed these complaints decreased. 
More and more climbers joined the rescue party as we walked down the tracks; over 15 climbers were assisting with the rescue by the time we got to the trestle. I expected to see snow machines on the other side of the trestle, but there were none. We carried him out the entire way. Very close to the parking area, a few EMTs met us. At the parking area we transferred the man onto a gurney and the EMTs put him in the ambulance. We were informed that they planned to take him to an area where a medical helicopter could land and transport him to Dartmouth’s hospital. 
Analysis 
My thoughts on the matter are, first and foremost, solo ice climbing is dangerous. This was the second major incident in a few weeks in the Whites involving a solo ice climber. The second is that one should not expect a major rescue if injured. This accident happened under the best possible conditions for a rescue. It was on a frequently climbed route, and there were many people around. Even so, it took 80 minutes to get the victim to the ambulance. If an injury occurred in a more remote area of the White Mountains, like Mt. Willey, it could be many hours before anyone responded. One must remember these rescue personnel are volunteers from a small town—in this case Bartlett. They did everything right, but they do not have the staff or resources to get paramedics to an injured climber in 15 minutes (or even an hour). What one can rely on is help from the tribe—every climber who saw the incident helped. But they can only help if they are around. (Source: Jesse Morenz.)
#!#!
#!#!
Avalanche, Fall on Snow/Ice - Inadequate Equipment, Inadequate Protection, Weather, Exceeding Abilities
Washington, Mt. Rainier, Liberty Ridge
Climb Year: 2013. Publication Year: 2014. 

On the morning of May 18, we (Cory Smith, 26, author of this report; Sydney Seyfart, 30; and Tim Smith, 23) were at about 13,000 feet on Liberty Ridge, just above the Black Pyramid. We were 1,100 feet below the summit of Liberty Cap and the end of the technical terrain. The night before we finished the last of our stove fuel. Two nights before we had discovered frost nip on my brother’s toes. We had been on the move since May 14, often through harrowing terrain. The weather had for the most part consisted of pervasive cloud cover that made for poor visibility. This made navigating the Carbon Glacier difficult. We had had to spend an extra day at Thumb Rock due to inclement weather.
Tim led a serac pitch, and then we simul-climbed an ice and snow slope above. There was one last steep, traversing pitch of 55- or 60-degree ice before easy terrain and the top of Liberty Cap. I had chosen to bring only two ice screws on this climb, and when I reached the foot of the final steep ice section I had only one left. The second was on my brother’s harness below me. I chose not to set a belay and tried climbing the pitch. 
As I only had one ice screw I conserved it, climbing high above a snow picket at the base of the ice. Above the steep ice band I reached a section with ice on the left and snow on the right. I moved to the snow to rest. I should have set the screw before venturing onto the snow. Tim and I were on opposite ends of a 60-meter rope, and Sydney was tied in the center. Because of the traversing, we were zigzag on the slope, with me directly above Tim and Sydney off to the side. As I stomped out steps, I triggered a small avalanche that swept me over an ice band. I fell for 40 feet and fractured the talus bone in my left ankle. My fall continued in tomahawk fashion down the slope between Sydney and Tim. Tim hunkered down on his tools and was hit by the avalanche while Sydney was out of the avalanche path. She had little time to react, and when the rope came taut I ripped her from her stance, along with the snow picket beside her. After the snow passed Tim, he looked up and saw Sydney fall past him, so he hunkered back down again. When the rope came taut, he was pulled about 10 feet down before arresting the fall. 
All told, I fell at least a couple of hundred feet and Sydney fell at least 100 feet. Sydney suffered a laceration and bruising above her left kidney, perhaps from the snow picket that popped beside her. I knew my ankle or leg had broken as I fell. When I came to a stop I saw that it was angulated 45 degrees medially. There was no pain or blood. 
I was on my side, facing downhill with the rope wrapped around me, constricting my breathing. I righted myself and tried to untangle from the rope, but with my broken ankle this was too difficult. Sydney was yelling above me, trying to figure out if I was OK. “No,” I answered, “my leg is broken.” I planted my picks in the slope above me, with my lanyards taut on my harness, and then I untied, unwound the skein, and tied back in. 
I knew that I had to try to climb out, for several reasons. First, Tim and Sydney weren’t going to leave me. Second, we had no way of contacting help and there were no other teams on the north side of the mountain. Third, remaining in our current location would require spending a night out on a 50-degree slope. (Our previous bivy was farther away than Liberty Cap, and reaching it would have required rappelling the serac and giving up precious progress.) Fourth, remaining in technical terrain would endanger the lives of any rescuers who tried to help us, whereas the terrain on top of Liberty Cap was relatively innocuous. 
The climbing was slow at first, but I developed a system involving the knee of my bad leg. (My kneecap later suffered cold injury because of this.) Sydney and Tim climbed until they reached the base of the ice band, where Tim set a belay. I reached the belay with some groveling and sat down on a snow bench Sydney had made. I gave my ice screw to Tim, and we decided he would lead the ice band. He completed a phenomenal lead and didn’t rest in any snow. Sydney set off after Tim, who had set a belay out of sight. When the rope came taut on my harness, I didn’t know what I was going to do, but I knew this traversing pitch would be decisive. Tim and Sydney couldn’t assist me, and using my left crampon was out of the question. On hard ice, my left knee didn’t work for anything but balance. However, it went better than expected, and once I finished the traverse they were able to assist my ascent. I set three points and yelled, “Pull!” They hauled on the rope and I moved. 
Once I reached the belay, Tim began breaking trail through deep snow toward the summit of Liberty Cap. I crawled and scooted along to reach it, then descended the other side to a bivy site. It was about 7 p.m. now, and our bivy site was on a large level area on the ridge descending from Liberty Cap toward its saddle with the Columbia Crest. 
They set up the tent with trekking poles because the tent poles had been thrown from my backpack in the fall. I lay down and did nothing, like a Samuel Beckett character. I still was not in pain. In the tent Sydney concluded that instead of going down the Emmons Glacier as we had planned, she and Tim needed to go to the summit early in the morning and make contact with guided parties that could get us help. At the time, Sunrise Road had not yet opened and Camp Schurman was not yet staffed, so the Emmons Glacier was deserted. From the summit they would go down the Disappointment Cleaver route on the southeast side of the mountain. I would remain in the tent and await rescue. 
The next day the weather was serene, the best yet, and Sydney’s plan worked. Tim and Sydney left me with all their food and water, thinking that I might be there for several days. They subsisted on the generosity of guides, rangers, and other climbers on the DC that day. Three hours after Tim and Sydney left the tent, three guides from IMG and RMI arrived and gave me medical attention, chocolate, tea, and food. They coordinated a rescue with the Rainier National Park rangers and U.S. Army Reserve 214th General Support Aviation Brigade. The area beside my tent served as a landing zone for a Chinook. I was flown off Liberty Cap at 3 p.m. I am indebted to all the individuals, guiding companies, and government organizations involved in my rescue. I am still more grateful to Tim and Sydney for saving all our lives. 
Unfortunately, Tim’s frost nip turned to frostbite. When he was assessed at Camp Muir, the rangers decided that he should not walk anymore, so they tobogganed him down the Muir Snowfield to Paradise and a waiting ambulance. Four months later, he had to have amputations of the first, second,
Analysis 
There are a number of ways we could have approached this climb to be better prepared and to decrease risk, including asking ourselves several questions more seriously beforehand: 
1. Was it reasonable to expect to navigate the Carbon Glacier and ascend Liberty Ridge in potentially poor conditions when none of us had climbed the route before? 
2. If so, should we have brought more provisions, fuel, and equipment than we would have brought if conditions were ideal? 
3. Should we have considered alternative, less committing routes in the area? 
4. Given the route’s isolation, would a sat phone or SPOT device have been useful? 
If we had brought more fuel, we would not have run low on water. Our initial itinerary was for a four-day climb, and we brought food and fuel for five days. But we ended up spending six days on the mountain. If we had brought more ice screws, I might not have run it out on that final ice pitch, risking a catastrophic fall. Ascending the ice slope above the Black Pyramid would have been faster and safer with more screws. I could have evaluated the slope more conservatively and avoided the snow patch. 
So how did Tim lose six toes to frostbite? Two additional, unanticipated days on the mountain increased the duration of his exposure to cold. Due to inexperience, Tim had brought cotton socks for his extra pair. Tim lent his first pair to Sydney on the third day and was unaware that his extra cotton pair would get wet and freeze. When we crawled into our tent during the last two nights, his socks had frozen to the toe boxes of his boots. During the climb, we were unaware of his cotton socks. Sydney and I should have been more involved in Tim’s pre-climb preparation. We knew that Tim was the least experienced mountaineer, but we failed to properly compensate for his inexperience during our preparations. Tim met up with us shortly before the climb and we went straight to Rainier. We should have taken the time to inspect his gear. 
For Sydney, Tim, and me, this climb was pivotal on a lifelong scale. This was an accident that should never have happened. (Source: Cory Smith.) and third toes of both feet. Sydney was the only one of us to descend the mountain under her own power.
#!#!
Weather - Benighted, Exceeding Abilities
Washington, Mt. Rainier, Liberty Ridge
Climb Year: 2013. Publication Year: 2014. 

On June 23, climber Patrick Moore (52) dialed 911 from his satellite phone around 5 p.m. Patrick and his partner, Peter Roach (mid-40s), had climbed Liberty Ridge in deteriorating weather. The ascent took them longer than planned, and incoming weather reduced visibility. Patrick and Peter felt uncomfortable navigating the descent of the Emmons/Winthrop Glaciers route. Dispatch transferred the call to Ranger Payne at Camp Muir, who advised the party to ascend to the crater rim and set up camp for the night, then descend the Disappointment Cleaver route when conditions improved in the morning. He advised against navigating at night in poor visibility. The climbers descended in the morning, passing Camp Muir by afternoon. Ranger Hutchins provided transportation from Paradise back to their vehicle at White River Campground.
Analysis 
The party of two did not have sufficient skills to navigate their intended route in the weather that occurred and did not have an appropriate backup plan if weather changed for the worse. (Source: T. Payne, Ranger.)
#!#!
Exhaustion — Possible AMS or HACE, Fall on Ice/Snow, Weather, Washington, Mount Rainier, Liberty Ridge
Publication Year: 2012. 

EXHAUSTION – POSSIBLE AMS OR HACE, FALL ON ICE/SNOW, WEATHER
Washington, Mount Rainier, Liberty Ridge
On June 12, Rob Plankers (50), Brad Clement (40), and Tanya Clement (48) departed White River for a summit attempt via the Liberty Ridge route. They were experienced climbers and were well equipped. On the last day of their ascent, Rob Plankers became exhausted, moderately hypothermic, and possibly frostbitten. Their slow ascent forced them to bivouac at 13,900 feet on a wide, windswept shoulder above the route, where they were exposed to high winds and drifting snow overnight. The following morning, Planker’s partners were unable to get him walking from their camp and were forced to leave him to seek assistance. They left him attached to a two-point mountaineering anchor with his sleeping bag, bivy sack, stove, and fuel. They contacted a ranger on Emmons Glacier at 5:00 p.m. that evening. Two teams of climbing rangers headed to his location, one team from Camp Schurman and the other from Camp Muir. One of the teams was forced to turn back at 12,100 feet due to high winds at 1:00 a.m. Members of the second team spent the night in a snow cave and resumed their efforts to reach the climber at 5:00 a.m. the next morning. A rescue team was inserted by Chinook helicopter (214th Airborne – Joint Base Ft. Lewis-McChord) and found some of Planker’s gear at the point where his partners left him, but were unable to find Planker. Air search revealed a 2,000-foot-long track leading down a 50-degree ice and snow-covered slope. The track indicated intermittent airborne periods and ended at an icefall below Liberty Wall. No signs of Planker were found during a thorough visual search of the slide area. Additional air resources were called in to assist, but the search was called off at 4:00 p.m. due to high winds. Limited visual searching by both ground and air teams continued throughout the season in case melting snow revealed additional clues.
Analysis
Rob Planker had summited Mount Rainier five times prior to this attempt, so he had appropriate expectations for the length and difficulty of the climb. His current fitness, however, was reportedly a precipitating factor, as it led to a forced bivy high on the exposed shoulder of Liberty Cap. The party’s decision to bivy high on the route instead of “pushing through” resulted in additional exposure to the high winds and low temps, and may have also increased the likelihood of AMS or HACE further debilitating the climber.
The decision to leave Rob Planker alone while the Clements went for help may, at first glance, seem callous, but was likely the most appropriate decision for the team. The Clements (a married couple) were unfamiliar with the route and would have been climbing solo through glaciated terrain had they split up.
It’s possible that Planker tried to stand up, and in the process, yanked his anchor upwards and out prior to falling, as the anchor material was not found on scene by searchers.
The party’s decision to not take a communication device, while admirable in some sense, may have also increased the time required to get help. As it was, the NPS was already poised to initiate a search,which sped up the overall response, but sadly, to no avail. The lesson here is to bring a communication device - and to use it appropriately. (Source: Brian Hasebe – Park Ranger, The News Tribune, Tacoma, WA, and Mount Rainier News Releases)
#!#!
Frostbite, Off Route, Inadequate Food, Lost Equipment, Washington, Mount Rainier National Park, Ptarmigan Ridge
Publication Year: 2006. 

FROSTBITE, OFF ROUTE, INADEQUATE FOOD, LOST EQUIPMENT
Washington, Mount Rainier National Park, Ptarmigan Ridge
On February 1, Chris Bamer (25) and Robert Montague (28) set out to ascend Ptarmigan Ridge. Both were guides for Rainier Mountaineering Incorporated (RMI). They expected to complete the climb by Thursday, but Bamer asked his girlfriend to call the NPS if the pair were not home by the evening of February 4. At 2015 on February 4, Bamer’s girlfriend contacted Mount Rainier National Park and notified them of the ascent. Later that same evening, however, she received a cell phone call from Bamer during which he explained that he was okay but had a little frostbite on his hand and toes. Bamer stated that the route was quite icy and that they were taking longer than expected. They were camped near 12,500 feet, had plenty of fuel, and though they were low on food, they did not require assistance. This information was relayed to park officials.
At 0745 on February 5, Bamer called the NPS on his RMI radio and asked for climbing route directions across the summit and how to descend the Gibraltar Ledges route. The team was still camped at 12,500 feet and had to climb through the rocks near 12,800 feet before ascending to Liberty Cap. Bamer reported the frostbite but felt things were going to be okay. The team was encouraged to complete their ascent, as the clear weather was forecast to deteriorate. Bamer was asked to notify the NPS when they reached Liberty Cap (the false summit at 14,112 feet).
At 1444, Bamer called to say that the team had reached Liberty Cap and were making their way towards Columbia Crest. (Montague later stated that they were actually only at 13,200 feet when the call was made). At 1755, Bamer again called the NPS and reported that the team was somewhere between Russell Cliffs and Liberty Cap. They reported whiteout conditions, snowfall, and high winds; because of this, the pair elected to stop moving and set camp.
At roughly 1130 on Feb 6, Montague reported being in a steam cave on the summit. Their plan was to descend towards Gibraltar Rock and then to Camp Muir. He also reported on Bamer’s frostbite, which included blackness in his toes and fingers and some blisters on his fingers. The team was in a snow cave on the summit and had run out of food and fuel. The wind was blowing 15mph and snow was falling.
Bamer and Montague left the summit at 1150 heading towards Gibraltar Rock. Along the way, they reported deteriorating weather conditions and numerous crevasses, reaching a rocky, corniced ridge at 1315. The team continued to descend, but the heavy snowfall and unfamiliarity with the route made route finding difficult. Over the next two hours, the pair tried to negotiate the Gibraltar Ledges but, in the end, had to rappel over some cliffs and descend steeper slopes towards the Nisqually Glacier.
The pair was in communication with the NPS throughout this process. NPS advised on route alternatives and predicted avalanche conditions. Bamer and Montague had difficulty with their GPS and compass. They reported very poor snow stability as they continued their descent.
Two rescue teams had been dispatched to Camp Muir earlier that day. The first team consisted of RMI guides Paul Maier and John Lucia, who arrived at Camp Muir around 1645 and, after a short break, continued toward the Nisqually Glacier to search for the pair. They reported dangerous avalanche conditions, low visibility, and heavy snowfall. They returned to Camp Muir at 1906 to get gear that would enable them to go out onto the glacier safely. A second team consisting of climbing rangers Stony Richards, Chad Kellogg, and Lara Kellogg arrived at Camp Muir at 1745 and then also headed out to search.
At 1817 Bamer and Montague experienced a small fall over steep terrain. They elected to cut their rope in order to get themselves out of their predicament. Montague lost his ice tools while digging himself out of the deep snow, which was over his head following the fall. They also lost a GPS and compass. Montague also reported that his headlamp was no longer working, and that the avalanche danger was extreme.
At about 1835, Bamer and Montague had regrouped and were descending once again. After about 30 minutes, they reported from 10,500 feet that the slope they were descending had become lower angle. At 2040, Kellogg, using a flash beacon, met up with Bamer and Montague at the 9,800-foot corner of the Nisqually and Muir Snowfield. Rangers Kellogg and Richards escorted them back to Camp Muir by 2130.
At Camp Muir the rescue teams provided food and medical care to the exhausted party. Bamer had not felt his feet for 36-48 hours. Many of his digits on both hands and feet were bruised to the first joint. The tips of his fingers and toes were purple and red. Blebs and blisters had already begun to appear on his hands. As transport would have to wait until the next morning, Bamer’s extremities were dressed and packaged in anticipation of extraction and transport to a medical facility the next day. Montague was in good condition with no signs of frostbite.
The next morning Bamer was taken by helicopter from Camp Muir directly to Harborview Medical Center. Montague descended to Paradise with the team of rangers.
Analysis
Bamer and Montague set off expecting to complete their journey in three days with a fourth day for contingency. On the morning of the day they expected to be out they were only at 10,200 feet with all of the technical climbing still ahead. By evening they had ascended only another 1,200 vertical feet with more difficult climbing ahead. It may have been wise at some point during this day or even the previous one to reevaluate their plans in view of their slow progress, dwindling supplies, and the difficult conditions. A logical point for reevaluation would have been the base of the ice cliff at 10,500 on the ridge, as the more technical climbing begins at this point. Backing off the climb at this point would have been a tough decision for the pair having come this far and with their objective right before them. They would have already gained 7,000 feet with only 4,000 more to the summit.
On the other hand they had already used two-thirds of their planned time and they had not even begun the climb. There would have been little reason for the pair to presume the going would get any easier. If anything, the more technical terrain would likely slow the progress as they encountered the steeper ice pitches. On the morning of their fourth day, already out beyond their expected return, this was still a reasonable time for reevaluation of the feasibility of continuing the climb. At the rate they were climbing (1,200 feet/day) through the technical section they could have predicted that it would take them another two days to reach the summit. Even if they had to rappel several pitches to descend the technical climbing, it still would have taken less time and effort than continuing on. Descending would have also spared them from climbing through the questionable weather ahead. (Source: Mike Gauthier, Climbing Ranger)
#!#!
Slip/Fall on Snow and Rock, Washington, Mount Rainier, Liberty Ridge
Publication Year: 2005. 

SUP/FALL ON SNOW AND ROCK
Washington, Mount Rainier, Liberty Ridge
Climber Scott Richards (42) called Mount Rainier National Park on a cell phone requesting a rescue for his climbing partner Peter Cooley (39) at 6:10 a.m. on May 15. The two-person team was ascending Liberty Ridge near 12,000 feet when Cooley’s crampon caught and he fell while leading. Richards was on the opposite side of the ridge-crest when the accident occurred and was able to stop the fall using a hip belay. Cooley had fallen approximately 30 feet and hit his head, sustaining severe head trauma including a skull fracture as well as injuries to his left arm and leg. At roughly 6:30 a.m., Ranger Mike Gauthier advised Richards via cell phone to chop out a platform, secure their tent, and stabilize and prepare Cooley for a lengthy evacuation. Scheduled cell phone calls were arranged to conserve the team’s cell phone batteries.
An Oregon Army National Guard Chinook and contract helicopter and climbing field teams were assembled for the rescue. At that time the weather was deteriorating rapidly, and forecasts predicted large amounts
of precipitation. On its initial reconnaissance, the contract helicopter approached Liberty Ridge, but due to whiteout conditions was forced to land on the Carbon Glacier at 8,000 feet and wait for a clearing. Because of the increasing clouds near the mountain, the Oregon National Guard Chinook helicopter was sent to Rimrock, WA, instead of Kautz Heli-base inside the park to connect with an aviation rescue team of NPS rangers and Rainier Mountaineering guides (RMI).
An air-assisted rescue seemed uncertain because of weather conditions, so a field team of two climbing rangers was hastily assembled and dispatched to make a quick ascent of Liberty Ridge. The advanced climbing rescue team of David Gottlieb and Chris Olson departed Ipsut Creek Campground Saturday at 4:00 p.m. Heavy rain and snowfall slowed Gottlieb and Olson, forcing them to bivouac on lower Curtis Ridge that evening. A second team consisting of five climbing rangers also assembled at Ipsut Creek Campground. They carried extra supplies and prepared to support the advance team for a lengthy ground evacuation.
Late afternoon clearing around the mountain allowed the contract helicopter to depart the Carbon Glacier and return to Kautz Heli-base. Richards was apprised of the rescue efforts and difficulties. He prepared for a night on the mountain at the accident site with Cooley.
Via cell phone the next morning, Richards reported that Cooley was in and out of consciousness all night and was unable to eat or drink. The weather remained inclement for much of the day.
A team of five climbers from Tacoma Mountain Rescue (TMR) departed Ipsut Creek Campground at 11:00 a.m. after a briefing at Longmire. Another TMR team of two staffed the Camp Muir hut. In all, over 60 people joined in the rescue effort; the event generated international media attention.
At noon, the Chinook team attempted a flight with rescue personnel but heavy cloud cover and foul weather caused the mission to be aborted. Difficult climbing conditions and harsh weather made progress for the ground/climbing teams very arduous. Rangers Gottlieb and Olson worked through whiteout conditions and deep snow on the Carbon Glacier to prepare a field operations basecamp at 8,800 feet in the Carbon Glacier basin below Willis Wall. A six-person climbing ranger team later joined them while the TMR team prepared a camp at 7,200 feet on lower Curtis Ridge. At 6:35 p.m. the weather briefly cleared above the Carbon Glacier, allowing the contract helicopter to conduct reconnaissance at the accident site and deliver a sling load of supplies, including a radio to replace Richard’s dead cell phone.
On the evening of May 16, climbing rangers Gottlieb and Charlie Borgh prepared for an ascent of Liberty Ridge on the morning of the 17th. They planned to access the accident site, a 50-55 degree ice slope at roughly 12,000 feet, evaluate the scene and determine the feasibility for a helicopter evacuation or, if impossible, a technical rope rescue. Behind them climbing rangers Johnson, Olson, Anderson, Sherred, and Loewen, laden with camping and rigging equipment, climbed to Thumb Rock, and established an advanced camp. Ranger Glenn Kessler remained at basecamp to manage field operations.
On May 17, the contract helicopter attempted to sling-load additional supplies to the climbing teams. However, the weather again thwarted the aviation operation. The Chinook insertion team also attempted a mountain flight but was unable due to weather and was forced to return to Yakima. Additional supplies and equipment were ferried via ground teams from Ipsut Creek campground to 7,200 feet on Lower Curtis Ridge.
Around noon, Gottlieb and Borgh arrived at the 11,800 foot accident site. Gottlieb attempted a medical assessment and relayed information to medical control via cell phone. Only limited care could be provided due to the conditions and patient and rescuer safety concerns. The team also prepared the area and set ice anchors preparing for a technical rescue. The weather improved throughout the afternoon and at 2:30 p.m., the contract helicopter delivered a sling load to the 8,800 foot camp, while a supply cache was transported to Thumb Rock. The stabilizing weather also allowed the Chinook insertion team to head for the mountain at 4:30 p.m.
As the Chinook lumbered over the mountain at 5:03 p.m., Cooley was extracted via vertical litter hoist. He was immediately flown to Madigan Hospital and, very sadly, pronounced dead. Gottlieb and Borgh descended Liberty Ridge with Richards to spend the night at Thumb Rock.
Analysis
Cooley and Richards were accomplished climbers. This accident was not a result of any lapse in judgment or lack of skill. Cooley’s short, but ultimately fatal fall seems to be the result of an unfortunate misstep. Cooley was wearing a climbing helmet, but sometime during the fall, he hit his head on a rock that contacted his temple just under the helmet brim. That impact eventually caused his death.
Any serious injury on a remote route at high elevation can be life-threatening due to the difficulty of access and evacuation. This accident highlights the difficulties of high altitude rescue on technical terrain, particularly when exacerbated by poor weather. Aviation is a key element of many successful upper-mountain rescues of climbers with serious injuries. When weather precludes flying, the survival of a critically injured climber is often compromised.
The fact that Richards was able to care for his climbing partner for almost 60 hours on a small exposed platform that he chopped in ice during poor weather speaks highly of him as an alpinist, rescuer, and friend. The NPS strongly recommends choosing climbing partners carefully, considering not only the ability to reach the summit, but how a partner will perform in the event of an emergency or stressful situation.
While many were saddened by the outcome of this extended event after so much effort by so many people, it should be noted that the rescue was also a great success in that Richards returned safely and no rescuers were hurt. Without his climbing partner, Richards would have been placed in the difficult position of soloing the route in order to reach safety. (Source: Mike Gauthier, SAR Ranger, Mount Rainier National Park)
(Editor's Note-.Another fatality and serious injury occurred on Liberty Ridge on June 3, when two climbers fell several hundred feet from just below the Black Pyramid.)
#!#!
Loss of Control—Voluntary Glissade, Faulty Use of Crampons, Inadequate Protection, Washington, Mount Rainier, Emmons/Winthrop Glacier Route
Publication Year: 2005. 

LOSS OF CONTROL—VOLUNTARY GLISSADE, FAULTY USE OF CRAMPONS, INADEQUATE PROTECTION
Washington, Mount Rainier, Emmons/Winthrop Glacier Route
On June 3, Doug Thiel (40) and his two climbing partners summited Mount Rainier via the Emmons Glacier Route. On their descent, Thiel started to experience a great deal of knee pain. The pain became so intense that he preferred to glissade instead of walking down. Thiel decided to glissade while roped and wearing crampons. It was the team’s intent to descend in this fashion back to Camp Schurman.
At 11,600 feet, Thiel hit an icy section and was unable to stop his slide. He slid uncontrollably past his partners and pulled them off their feet. All three fell 75-100 feet before Thiel’s two partners arrested. Thiel sustained a lower left leg injury in the process and recalled the rope wrapping around his leg, which he feels contributed to the injury.
At 3:30 p.m., the Park received a cell phone call from Thiel’s team detailing the accident and requesting assistance. With a large rescue and body recovery already in progress on Liberty Ridge, the I.C. dispatched a reserve climbing ranger team to the site of the new accident. Climbing rangers Stefan Lofgren and Stoney Richards were inserted on the Emmons Glacier via light helicopter near 11,300 feet. They ascended to the accident site, assessed Thiel and then carried him to a Landing Zone and from there he was flown to the Kautz Heli-base where he was transferred to an ambulance.
Analysis
Thiel wanted to avoid requesting outside help while descending. Unfortunately, glissading, particularly on the upper mountain glaciers while wearing crampons, is dangerous. It would have been safer and more efficient for Thiel’s partners to have steadily lowered him in a sitting position, one rope-length at a time. On most sections they could have simply lowered him hand over hand. On steeper sections, they could have lowered him off set protection (pickets, ice axes, etc). In the end, it is always best to avoid glissading. Glissading with crampons is never a good idea. (Source: Mike Gauthier, SAR Ranger, Mount Rainier National Park)
#!#!
Avalanche, Washington, Mount Rainier, Liberty Ridge
Publication Year: 2005. 

AVALANCHE
Washington, Mount Rainier, Liberty Ridge
Luke Casady and Ansel Vizcaya (both 29) departed White River Campground on Friday June 11 for a planned ascent of Liberty Ridge. The exact details of the subsequent 48 hours may never be known, but the facts uncovered during the subsequent search, body recoveries, and ensuing investigation suggest the following:
Casady and Vizcaya, experienced climbers, camped along Curtis Ridge on Friday and began the ascent up Liberty Ridge early Saturday morning. It is likely the pair climbed past Thumb Rock, around and continued up the ridge as the first signs of incoming weather appeared. With the winds building and the visibility decreasing the climbers continued pushing forward. By early evening, the reports at Camp Muir included significantly higher winds and heavy snowfall. Casady and Vizcaya were somewhere high on Liberty Ridge, and probably realized that they would have to hunker down and wait out the storm.
Through the night, winds hammered the mountain, blowing snow from some areas while building large slabs in others. This was an uncomfortable night for climbers everywhere on Mount Rainier. Heavy snowfall and high winds destroyed several tents at Camp Muir.
By Sunday morning several inches of snow had fallen, but more importantly, the high winds had deposited large amounts of snow on leeward slopes. Casady and Vizcaya were probably camped between 12,900 feet and 13,500 feet above the Black Pyramid. Sometime during that night or the next day, Casady and Vizcaya were caught in a large avalanche. The avalanche probably released several hundred feet above them but below Liberty Cap. The avalanche most likely encompassed them and the entire upper route; everything was pushed down the 4,000 foot Liberty Wall to the Carbon Glacier. Neither climber could have survived the fall.
It took many reconnaissance flights over several days to locate the bodies.
Analysis
Casady and Vizcaya were found in their climbing harnesses but unroped. The rope found had no knots in it. Their packs were largely packed, yet the pair had their parkas on. It appeared as though they were either still in camp, in the process of setting up or in the process of breaking camp when the avalanche occurred.
The fracture line noted on Liberty Wall was direct evidence of a large slab avalanche whose crown extended halfway to Ptarmigan Ridge, some 250 meters. The crown was only observed from the air, but appeared to vary in thickness from about 25-100cm. Whether or not this crown belonged to the avalanche that swept the climbers to their deaths is uncertain, as a smaller slide could have caught them. Large avalanches were occurring on the mountain following the Saturday night storm.
Other observations during the search indicated that large avalanches had run on other slopes in the general vicinity of Liberty and Ptarmigan Ridges. There had been no climbers on these slopes so it was concluded that most slides were naturally triggered events. It seems unlikely that there were any climbers above Casady and Vizcaya, yet this remains unknown. The climbers had indicated when they registered that they had avalanche transceivers with them though neither was wearing one. A transceiver, however, would have provided no protection from such an avalanche.
It is important to note that snowstorms and avalanches do occur on Mount Rainier in the summer. Climbers during all seasons should be prepared to assess avalanche issues. (Source: Mike Gauthier, SAR Ranger, Mount Rainier National Park)
#!#!
Stranded, Exceeding Abilities, Incompatible Partners—Poor Communication, Washington, Mount Rainier, Liberty Ridge
Publication Year: 2005. 

STRANDED, EXCEEDING ABILITIES, INCOMPATIBLE PARTNERS–POOR COMMUNICATION
Washington, Mount Rainier, Liberty Ridge
Bruce Penn (43) and A1 Hancock (44) departed White River to climb Liberty Ridge on June 13. It took them three days to reach the base. On the third day, while looking at Liberty Ridge, Penn voiced concern to Hancock about the steepness of the route and his ability to climb it.
They spent the day talking about descent, but decided to reevaluate their plan at the base of Liberty Ridge. On the fourth day, June 16, an apprehensive Penn decided to start up the ridge with Hancock setting anchors and belaying every pitch. It took 14 hours for the pair to reach Thumb Rock. Both individuals were exhausted and dehydrated when they finally arrived.
Penn knew that it should only take four to six hours to reach Thumb Rock from lower Curtis Ridge. He was surprised that other climbing parties were not placing protection and climbing the lower ridge without belay. He then realized that their climbing method was not practical for the route.
On the fifth morning, Penn knew that he could not complete the climb and called 911 on his cell phone to ask for assistance. He did not discuss this with Hancock and only informed him after the call had already occurred. That call reached Supervisory Climbing Ranger Mike Gauthier. During the conversation, Penn stated that his team could not go up or down but added that there were no injuries and they had enough food and fuel for a few days. Since there was no obvious urgency and because an active SAR was already in progress on Liberty Ridge, Gauthier informed Penn that they would have to wait for a rescue or assistance.
At 12:44 p.m., Penn called again stating that he “...could not climb up or down from Thumb Rock.” Penn again acknowledged that he and his partner were okay, but that their arms were quite sore, they were dehydrated and that they had bad vibes about the route. Hancock felt that their best option was to continue the climb up and over, but refused to go back down. Penn was unwilling to continue up or down even with additional supplies and gear the NPS offered to drop at their location. It was explained to Penn that another more urgent SAR was in progress and that they would need to remain where they were until more personnel and resources were available.
At 7:30 p.m. Penn again called the Park requesting a helicopter rescue. When told that their rescue would still require a belayed down-climb, Penn seemed unwilling to cooperate. He said, “I just want to be off the mountain.”
On the sixth day, arrangements were made with the Oregon National Guard for a helicopter hoist of the pair as rescue and recovery efforts remained ongoing for Casady and Vizcaya. Rangers made two airdrops—food, fuel, and a cell phone—for Penn and Hancock at Thumb Rock.
On the seventh day, an Oregon National Guard Chinook helicopter flew to the scene with three climbing rangers aboard. Ranger David Gottlieb was lowered to Thumb Rock via hoist and assisted both climbers back into the helicopter. The climbers were successfully removed from the mountain that day.
Analysis
Penn and Hancock met on a guided climb of Mount McKinley the previous year. They had not climbed together before, but did discuss and research Mount Rainier and Liberty Ridge extensively. Some climbers often overlook the important aspect of climbing relationships and partner compatibility. The importance of a skills assessment, common goals and similar abilities are sometimes overshadowed by the excitement of summiting the mountain or doing a route.
A commendable aspect of this incident was that the team realized things were not going well and pulled back before getting injured. The NPS recognizes that people commit errors in judgment and make mistakes, but suggests that climbers not proceed when originally presented with questionable situations.
As a reminder, Liberty Ridge requires a substantial amount of physical strength, technical skill, effective communication and comfort with a heavy pack on steep ice for 6,000 feet of climbing. (Source: Mike Gauthier, SAR Ranger, Mount Rainier National Park)
#!#!
Fall on Snow, Weather, Exposure, Moving Too Slowly, Washington, Mount Rainier, Liberty Ridge
Publication Year: 2003. 

FALL ON SNOW, WEATHER, EXPOSURE, MOVING TOO SLOWLY
Washington, Mount Ranier, Liberty Ridge
On May 29, Mount Rainier National Park communications received a 911 cell phone call from a climbing team at St. Elmo’s Pass. They were requesting a rescue for Andreas Kurth, another climber who reported having an accident near Liberty Cap the night before. Andreas just descended the Winthrop Glacier solo after his team, Cornelius Beilharz, Grit Kleinschmidt, and Keeta Owens, encountered serious trouble during a storm. Kurth reported that Beilharz was already dead from a fall and that the condition of the other two women was unknown. Andreas had last seen them in an exposed snow cave, hypothermic, near Liberty Cap.
The Kurth team had summited Liberty Ridge the night before, close to 6:00 p.m. They became disoriented while trying to descend from Liberty Cap to the Winthrop Glacier in a fierce storm with whiteout conditions. After unsuccessfully locating the Winthrop Glacier, the team then attempted to set up tents. However, the winds were too strong and made the task impossible. Still disoriented, the team then proceeded to dig snow caves.
Upon doing so, they encountered an impassable ice layer three feet below the surface. Unbeknownst to the team, the snow caves were being constructed atop a steep ice slope, just southeast of Liberty Cap, and fully exposed to the weather.
Unable to penetrate the ice, Kurth used the remains of a tent and the beginnings of a snow cave to erect a makeshift shelter for him and Kleinschmidt. Beilharz and Owens were attempting the same. Kurth and Kleinschmidt took cover in their shelter and got some rest as Beilharz and Owens worked to finish theirs. That’s when the initial accident occurred. Beilharz somehow slipped while digging the snow cave and fell out of sight down the steep slope. Owens then rushed to report the incident to Kurth and while doing so, accidentally collapsed the makeshift shelter.
Struggle ensued as the team was again exposed to the storm. Kurth could not find one of his plastic boot shells after the snow cave collapsed. This presented problems as he attempted to resurrect the shelter in the dark. While securing the tent to the cave, Kurth also slipped and fell. The slope below the snow cave was roughly 50 degrees and icy, but it leveled off a few hundred feet below. There, Kurth landed and found Beilharz. Unfortunately, his climbing partner was dead.
Kurth tried to climb up to the snow cave but was unable to on the steep ice without a hard boot shell. He instead spent the rest of the night nearby in a naturally protected site, huddling in a salvaged sleeping bag that had also fallen from the snow caves. At first light, he reoriented himself and made his way down the Winthrop Glacier to report the emergency.
The Park Service began rescue efforts that afternoon. Dee Patterson led the field team off six climbing rangers. They were flown to the summit of Mount Rainier to search, rescue, and recover the climbers. Another helicopter was dispatched to St. Elmo’s Pass to pick up Kurth.
Initial aerial reconnaissance of the summit helicopter revealed two climbers face down in the snow beneath a steep icy slope. They were located a few hundred feet below Liberty Cap on the southeast side. The US Army Chinook then inserted the Park Service team between Liberty Cap and Columbia Crest.
The team quickly located Beilharz and Owens at the base of the steep icy slope below the snow cave. Owens was dead when found. The team then began searching for Kleinschmidt, checking first the snow cave and later a heavily crevassed area below the accident site. Ground teams, however, did not locate her that day. Deteriorating weather conditions and sunlight constraints forced the recovery to be called off and only Owens could be retrieved.
The next day, similar efforts resumed, except this time under more favorable weather. Kleinschmidt was located from the air and recovered along with Beilharz and the climbing gear from the snow cave. Kleinschmidt apparently survived the fall but died from exposure while taking cover from the storm in the crevasse. Beilharz also died from exposure and Owens expired from trauma, most likely sustained during the fall.
Analysis
The Kurth party possessed the experience and technical skills to ascend the route. What caught the team was inclement weather and pace. The team had planned to ascend Liberty Ridge more quickly, but was unable to do so. Generally speaking, the larger the team, the more slowly it moves.
When the four finally reached Liberty Cap, it was late in the day and there was little daylight left. Furthermore, the storm had intensified and the visibility had deteriorated. It’s not uncommon for climbers to ascend the mountain under “reasonable” weather conditions only to be hit by fierce storms once on top. This is especially the case with Liberty Ridge, because the route is protected but the summit and Liberty Cap are directly exposed to the winds off the Pacific.
Though it seems counter productive to descend the route, away from an easier descent route and an established base camp, it’s sometimes much safer to do so when confronted by these conditions. It’s very difficult to navigate safely in severe weather while on the summit just after finishing Liberty Ridge. Many climbers have found more favorable bivy sites and snow cave locations back down the ridge (especially near the bergschrund) when faced with these conditions. (Source: Mike Gauthier, Climbing Ranger)
#!#!
Falling Rock, Weather, Late Start-Climbing Too Slowly, Washington, Mount Rainier, Liberty Ridge
Publication Year: 2003. 

FALLING ROCK, WEATHER, LATE START—CLIMBING TOO SLOWLY
Washington, Mount Ranier, Liberty Ridge
Around 11:30 a.m. on June 25, Mount Rainier Park Communications received a 911 call from a team of three climbers requesting a rescue from 9,700 feet on Liberty Ridge. The team reported that one of their members, Jessie Whitcomb, had been struck by a rock in the head while ascending lower Liberty Ridge. The force of impact was so great that it destroyed the helmet and knocked Jessie unconscious.
The Whitcomb team had left White River Campground and spent two days getting to the base of Liberty Ridge. Hoping to make Thumb Rock by then, they instead elected to bivy near 9,200 feet on the ridge and continue climbing the next day. The team left the bivy site around 9:00 a.m. and noticed rockfall right from the start. While attempting to regain to the ridge-crest, Jessie was hit. He doesn’t remember exactly how the incident occurred, but his father noted that rockfall was prevalent in the specific area the team was forced to cross.
Though Whitcomb was knocked out, he regained some level consciousness as his father helped move him to a safer location. The team then waited, calling for help, which took nearly two hours because of poor cellular service.
The Park Service initiated rescue efforts by flying climbing rangers Stefan Lofgren and Nick Giguere to the base of Liberty Ridge via a US Army Reserve Chinook helicopter. The two were inserted via cable-hoist (Jungle Penetrator) at 8,900 feet on the Carbon Glacier. From there, they climbed with medical and rescue gear to the accident site on the ridge. Once on scene, they provided patient assessment and stabilization, determining that Whitcomb needed to be evacuated immediately. The patient, however, could not be hoisted from that location and had to be lowered 900 feet to a safer landing zone on the Carbon Glacier.
Additional rescue personnel, comprised of NPS climbing rangers and RMI guides, organized and prepared for the technical lowering. A smaller helicopter (a Bell Jet Ranger—87L) was to ferry and insert the additional rescuers on the Carbon Glacier. RMI Guide Dave Hahn was flown from the NPS heli-base to Camp Schurman to pick up Lead Climbing Ranger Chris Olson. Those two comprised the second team of rescuers. After picking up Olson at Camp Schurman, 87L circled north around the mountain and attempted to insert the team on the Carbon Glacier. While doing so, the helicopter crash-landed.
Rangers observed the ship as it attempted to land on the glacier slope. When the helicopter did this, the skids underneath the ship began to slide. Something struck the ship in the rear and the helicopter quickly rose from the ground. It then began rotating to the right, crash-landing downhill roughly 40 feet away. Thankfully, all occupants walked away from the crash unhurt; however, the ship was badly damaged. The tail boom wrapped around the body, the rotors fell apart and the transmission crashed through the passenger compartment nearly hitting Olson and dousing him in engine fluids.
Remaining rescue personnel were quickly redirected to the Chinook helicopter for Jungle Penetrator insertion. Rich Lechleitner and Brian Hasebe inserted at 87L’s crash site, while the pilot of the 87L was extracted. Olson, Hahn, Hasebe and Lechleitner then continued to the climbing accident site to help complete the rescue of Jessie Whitcomb.
From there, Lofgren directed the technical evacuation, which required a 900-foot, high-angle lowering through icefall and rockfall hazards as well as a bergschrund crossing. Once the patient, his partners, and rescue team were on the Carbon Glacier, the Chinook Helicopter returned and hoisted them all off the mountain. The patient was flown to Madigan Army hospital at Ft. Lewis and has since made a fall recovery. The helicopter was never salvaged from the accident site because of its high exposure to avalanche, icefall, and rockfall hazards.
Analysis
Temperatures were warm that day and the snow on the lower ridge was soft. On such days, it is strongly recommended that climbers leave early. Alpine starts apply when traveling on loose rocky ridges or over glaciers with lots of crevasse slots. Many challenges exist on the Liberty Ridge route far below high camp.
Warm temperatures on Mount Rainier also mean rockfall, which the Whitcomb party noted. Wearing a helmet can only do so much when confronted with baseball and larger sized rocks. Thus, pace also becomes more important. The ability to move rapidly can help with success and safety. Many teams ascend Liberty Ridge too slowly. Siege climbing the route has again and again proven dangerous. In this case, the Whitcomb Party’s pace was slow. This increased their amount of time in rockfall hazardous areas. (Source: Mike Gauthier, Climbing Ranger)
#!#!
Fall on Snow, Weather, Exposure, Moving Too Slowly, Washington, Mount Rainier, Liberty Ridge
Publication Year: 2003. 

FALL ON SNOW, WEATHER, EXPOSURE, MOVING TOO SLOWLY
Washington, Mount Ranier, Liberty Ridge
On May 29, Mount Rainier National Park communications received a 911 cell phone call from a climbing team at St. Elmo’s Pass. They were requesting a rescue for Andreas Kurth, another climber who reported having an accident near Liberty Cap the night before. Andreas just descended the Winthrop Glacier solo after his team, Cornelius Beilharz, Grit Kleinschmidt, and Keeta Owens, encountered serious trouble during a storm. Kurth reported that Beilharz was already dead from a fall and that the condition of the other two women was unknown. Andreas had last seen them in an exposed snow cave, hypothermic, near Liberty Cap.
The Kurth team had summited Liberty Ridge the night before, close to 6:00 p.m. They became disoriented while trying to descend from Liberty Cap to the Winthrop Glacier in a fierce storm with whiteout conditions. After unsuccessfully locating the Winthrop Glacier, the team then attempted to set up tents. However, the winds were too strong and made the task impossible. Still disoriented, the team then proceeded to dig snow caves.
Upon doing so, they encountered an impassable ice layer three feet below the surface. Unbeknownst to the team, the snow caves were being constructed atop a steep ice slope, just southeast of Liberty Cap, and fully exposed to the weather.
Unable to penetrate the ice, Kurth used the remains of a tent and the beginnings of a snow cave to erect a makeshift shelter for him and Kleinschmidt. Beilharz and Owens were attempting the same. Kurth and Kleinschmidt took cover in their shelter and got some rest as Beilharz and Owens worked to finish theirs. That’s when the initial accident occurred. Beilharz somehow slipped while digging the snow cave and fell out of sight down the steep slope. Owens then rushed to report the incident to Kurth and while doing so, accidentally collapsed the makeshift shelter.
Struggle ensued as the team was again exposed to the storm. Kurth could not find one of his plastic boot shells after the snow cave collapsed. This presented problems as he attempted to resurrect the shelter in the dark. While securing the tent to the cave, Kurth also slipped and fell. The slope below the snow cave was roughly 50 degrees and icy, but it leveled off a few hundred feet below. There, Kurth landed and found Beilharz. Unfortunately, his climbing partner was dead.
Kurth tried to climb up to the snow cave but was unable to on the steep ice without a hard boot shell. He instead spent the rest of the night nearby in a naturally protected site, huddling in a salvaged sleeping bag that had also fallen from the snow caves. At first light, he reoriented himself and made his way down the Winthrop Glacier to report the emergency.
The Park Service began rescue efforts that afternoon. Dee Patterson led the field team off six climbing rangers. They were flown to the summit of Mount Rainier to search, rescue, and recover the climbers. Another helicopter was dispatched to St. Elmo’s Pass to pick up Kurth.
Initial aerial reconnaissance of the summit helicopter revealed two climbers face down in the snow beneath a steep icy slope. They were located a few hundred feet below Liberty Cap on the southeast side. The US Army Chinook then inserted the Park Service team between Liberty Cap and Columbia Crest.
The team quickly located Beilharz and Owens at the base of the steep icy slope below the snow cave. Owens was dead when found. The team then began searching for Kleinschmidt, checking first the snow cave and later a heavily crevassed area below the accident site. Ground teams, however, did not locate her that day. Deteriorating weather conditions and sunlight constraints forced the recovery to be called off and only Owens could be retrieved.
The next day, similar efforts resumed, except this time under more favorable weather. Kleinschmidt was located from the air and recovered along with Beilharz and the climbing gear from the snow cave. Kleinschmidt apparently survived the fall but died from exposure while taking cover from the storm in the crevasse. Beilharz also died from exposure and Owens expired from trauma, most likely sustained during the fall.
Analysis
The Kurth party possessed the experience and technical skills to ascend the route. What caught the team was inclement weather and pace. The team had planned to ascend Liberty Ridge more quickly, but was unable to do so. Generally speaking, the larger the team, the more slowly it moves.
When the four finally reached Liberty Cap, it was late in the day and there was little daylight left. Furthermore, the storm had intensified and the visibility had deteriorated. It’s not uncommon for climbers to ascend the mountain under “reasonable” weather conditions only to be hit by fierce storms once on top. This is especially the case with Liberty Ridge, because the route is protected but the summit and Liberty Cap are directly exposed to the winds off the Pacific.
Though it seems counter productive to descend the route, away from an easier descent route and an established base camp, it’s sometimes much safer to do so when confronted by these conditions. It’s very difficult to navigate safely in severe weather while on the summit just after finishing Liberty Ridge. Many climbers have found more favorable bivy sites and snow cave locations back down the ridge (especially near the bergschrund) when faced with these conditions. (Source: Mike Gauthier, Climbing Ranger)
#!#!
Falling Rock, Weather, Late Start-Climbing Too Slowly, Washington, Mount Rainier, Liberty Ridge
Publication Year: 2003. 

FALLING ROCK, WEATHER, LATE START—CLIMBING TOO SLOWLY
Washington, Mount Ranier, Liberty Ridge
Around 11:30 a.m. on June 25, Mount Rainier Park Communications received a 911 call from a team of three climbers requesting a rescue from 9,700 feet on Liberty Ridge. The team reported that one of their members, Jessie Whitcomb, had been struck by a rock in the head while ascending lower Liberty Ridge. The force of impact was so great that it destroyed the helmet and knocked Jessie unconscious.
The Whitcomb team had left White River Campground and spent two days getting to the base of Liberty Ridge. Hoping to make Thumb Rock by then, they instead elected to bivy near 9,200 feet on the ridge and continue climbing the next day. The team left the bivy site around 9:00 a.m. and noticed rockfall right from the start. While attempting to regain to the ridge-crest, Jessie was hit. He doesn’t remember exactly how the incident occurred, but his father noted that rockfall was prevalent in the specific area the team was forced to cross.
Though Whitcomb was knocked out, he regained some level consciousness as his father helped move him to a safer location. The team then waited, calling for help, which took nearly two hours because of poor cellular service.
The Park Service initiated rescue efforts by flying climbing rangers Stefan Lofgren and Nick Giguere to the base of Liberty Ridge via a US Army Reserve Chinook helicopter. The two were inserted via cable-hoist (Jungle Penetrator) at 8,900 feet on the Carbon Glacier. From there, they climbed with medical and rescue gear to the accident site on the ridge. Once on scene, they provided patient assessment and stabilization, determining that Whitcomb needed to be evacuated immediately. The patient, however, could not be hoisted from that location and had to be lowered 900 feet to a safer landing zone on the Carbon Glacier.
Additional rescue personnel, comprised of NPS climbing rangers and RMI guides, organized and prepared for the technical lowering. A smaller helicopter (a Bell Jet Ranger—87L) was to ferry and insert the additional rescuers on the Carbon Glacier. RMI Guide Dave Hahn was flown from the NPS heli-base to Camp Schurman to pick up Lead Climbing Ranger Chris Olson. Those two comprised the second team of rescuers. After picking up Olson at Camp Schurman, 87L circled north around the mountain and attempted to insert the team on the Carbon Glacier. While doing so, the helicopter crash-landed.
Rangers observed the ship as it attempted to land on the glacier slope. When the helicopter did this, the skids underneath the ship began to slide. Something struck the ship in the rear and the helicopter quickly rose from the ground. It then began rotating to the right, crash-landing downhill roughly 40 feet away. Thankfully, all occupants walked away from the crash unhurt; however, the ship was badly damaged. The tail boom wrapped around the body, the rotors fell apart and the transmission crashed through the passenger compartment nearly hitting Olson and dousing him in engine fluids.
Remaining rescue personnel were quickly redirected to the Chinook helicopter for Jungle Penetrator insertion. Rich Lechleitner and Brian Hasebe inserted at 87L’s crash site, while the pilot of the 87L was extracted. Olson, Hahn, Hasebe and Lechleitner then continued to the climbing accident site to help complete the rescue of Jessie Whitcomb.
From there, Lofgren directed the technical evacuation, which required a 900-foot, high-angle lowering through icefall and rockfall hazards as well as a bergschrund crossing. Once the patient, his partners, and rescue team were on the Carbon Glacier, the Chinook Helicopter returned and hoisted them all off the mountain. The patient was flown to Madigan Army hospital at Ft. Lewis and has since made a fall recovery. The helicopter was never salvaged from the accident site because of its high exposure to avalanche, icefall, and rockfall hazards.
Analysis
Temperatures were warm that day and the snow on the lower ridge was soft. On such days, it is strongly recommended that climbers leave early. Alpine starts apply when traveling on loose rocky ridges or over glaciers with lots of crevasse slots. Many challenges exist on the Liberty Ridge route far below high camp.
Warm temperatures on Mount Rainier also mean rockfall, which the Whitcomb party noted. Wearing a helmet can only do so much when confronted with baseball and larger sized rocks. Thus, pace also becomes more important. The ability to move rapidly can help with success and safety. Many teams ascend Liberty Ridge too slowly. Siege climbing the route has again and again proven dangerous. In this case, the Whitcomb Party’s pace was slow. This increased their amount of time in rockfall hazardous areas. (Source: Mike Gauthier, Climbing Ranger)
#!#!
Stranded-Weather, Climbing too Slowly, Exposure-Hypothermia and Loss of Control Glissading, Faulty Use of Crampons, Washington, Mount Rainier, Liberty Ridge and Kautz Glacier
Publication Year: 2003. 

STRANDED—WEATHER, CLIMBING TOO SLOWLY, EXPOSURE— HYPOTHERMIA AND LOSS OF CONTROL GLISSADING, FAULTY USE OF CRAMPONS
Washington, Mount Ranier, Liberty Ridge and Kautz Glacier
On Saturday June 29, the Quillen party of two was rescued from a summit crevasse bivouac, three days overdue from a planned climbing trip of Liberty Ridge. Also that day, climber Yong Phan was rescued from 8900 feet on the approach to Camp Hazard. Phan had broken his lower right leg/ ankle.
The Quillen team began their climb on Sunday, June 23, ascending just ahead of the Whitcomb party previously mentioned. The Quillen team had communication with the Whitcomb party before their accident and witnessed the rescue and helicopter activity from Thumb Rock high camp Tuesday, June 25. On the morning of June 26, the Quillen team continued with their ascent of Liberty Ridge, wondering what had become of the Whitcomb party.
Most of the day was spent carefully climbing the route as the team moved cautiously over the exposed icy terrain. At sunset, they finally reached Liberty Cap. Spent, they decided to make camp and enjoyed the lights of Seattle. By 4:00 a.m., the temper of the mountain had changed. The visibility had decreased to whiteout conditions and the wind speed and precipitation increased dramatically. A significant storm had blown in.
They broke camp and attempted to find a route over to the Emmons/ Winthrop Glacier. Quickly, they recognized how futile this was, even remembering the tragic events of previous weeks. Instead, they decided to take cover and bivouac in a crevasse near the Summit Col. During the storm, they found a suitable slot and fixed an anchor with an ice ax. From there, they rappelled 50 feet into a cold dark hole to wait out the weather.
On a “shelf” in the crevasse, the pair huddled, inside sleeping bags and wrapped in the tent. The average temperature was 20–25 degrees F and there was little food other than gorp remaining. They also lacked fuel to run the stove, and were forced to melt water by collecting spindrift in plastic bottles, wrapping those in the sleeping bag. Roughly twice each day, one of them would ascend the fixed rope to the surface and check weather conditions. Once there, they would also reset the emergency signal marker, which was a red piece of fabric attached to a metal tent pole, stuck in the ice on the large summit plateau.
Melting snow, running out of food, and living in a crevasse was quickly accepted as a losing battle, but the team remained calm and stayed together. They considered descending but the storm was too fierce given their deteriorated condition. The Park Service was aware of the overdue party but could do nothing because the weather was too severe for both flying and upper-mountain climbing. Not until Saturday afternoon June 29 did periods of clear skies make flying possible.
During this time, another climbing accident had occurred below the high camp on the Kautz Glacier Route. Mr. Phan twisted and broke hislower leg while sliding with crampons. Phan was assisted to a safe location by his teammates, who then hiked out to Paradise to call for help.
Mid morning on the 29th, a ground team from Tacoma Mountain Rescue climbed towards Phan’s location from Paradise. The weather was poor for upper-mountain flying, but reasonable for lower-mountain climbing. The TMR team made good progress as the weather cleared throughout the day. These clearings enabled the US Army Chinook Helicopters to provide aerial support for the Park Service on both rescue missions.
Because of occasional cloud cover, the initial flight inserted ranger Giguere and rescuer Haseby via Jungle Penetrator 600 feet above Phan’s accident site. They down climbed to meet Phan, where they then stabilized and prepared him for air evacuation.
After inserting team one, the Chinook then began aerial search for the Quillen party. They searched Liberty Ridge, its fall lines, the summit plateau, and Liberty Cap. Nearly an hour later and near the end of a fuel load, the helicopter finally noted a small hole in the ice near the Summit Col. Next to it was a tent pole with a red marker. The ship hovered over the hole for some time, but no activity was seen. The ship then returned to Gray Field to refuel.
During this time, Giguere and Hasebe prepared Phan for Jungle Penetrator evacuation. This required leg stabilization and transport to a better landing zone some 300 feet higher. It also meant waiting for the weather to clear, as the clouds were in and out throughout the rescue.
Sunset was approaching when climbing rangers Gottlieb, Shank, and Richards were dropped off on the summit to spend the night and search the “marked” crevasse. After drop off, the Chinook departed to assist Giguere’s team. The weather, however, remained obstinate. At 8:45 p.m., Gottlieb reported finding the Quillen party alive in the crevasse. He immediately called for a pickup, as both were very hypothermic and in need of food, warmth, and better shelter.
The Chinook quickly returned to the summit and picked up the Quillen party and Gottlieb’s team. Then it returned to Giguere’s location, where fortunately, the weather had improved, making it possible to hoist the rescuers and patient before nightfall.
Analysis
The Quillen party undoubtedly saved themselves in a location and under similar conditions that have killed others. Their survival techniques are commendable but their pace put them in a position to need them. The party admitted that though they were able to climb the route, they had hoped to do so in better style and time.
Every year, teams over-estimate their skill and ability when measuring up to Liberty Ridge. The route is committing, longer, and more strenuous than most perceive. A two- or three-day trip commonly becomes a four- to seven-day trip when the weather kicks up its heels. Add a little altitude sickness and general fatigue and your team suddenly moves at a snail’s pace above 13,000 feet. If you want to climb Liberty Ridge and not spend aweek or ten days doing it, make sure you’re in the best shape possible and are comfortable moving on exposed big mountain terrain with a pack.
Glissading seems like an easy way down the mountain, but it’s also dangerous. Many climbers and hikers are injured glissading on Mount Rainier each summer. What seems like an innocuous descent technique has actually resulted in numerous broken ankles, twisted knees, pulled muscles and, at minimum, loss of gear. (Source: Mike Gauthier, Climbing Ranger)
(Editor’s Note: If snow conditions are such that crampons are needed, then one should not be glissading.)

